[Transcript missing]
And we're also going to cover
things like when good apps go bad.
It'll be a Fox special this fall.
Like if you'll notice, if you deploy on,
say, your eight processor CPU,
or eight CPU Solaris box,
you can see your CPU usage go
to 800%. That's always fun.
You can even see it go to 900%, and then
it takes down the machine next to it.
There's also problems with
like when your working set gets
larger than physical memory,
and then disk is obviously
a lot slower than RAM,
and when you start hitting
the disk for memory,
that's bad.
Also, there's the situations that
a lot of people seem to miss,
which is like network saturation when
packets or connections are being dropped.
I know of one example of a very
large company who will remain unnamed
who called the FBI because they
thought they were being hacked,
and it turned out that
they had two Windows boxes,
and their traffic rates were so high
that the TCP/IP stack was falling
over and dropping connections.
So, you know,
that gets back to the analysis thing,
and calling the FBI to analyze
the performance problems of your
apps is probably not a good idea.
There's also just the basic
situation of like when your responses
require too much computation.
If you're going off and
calculating pi to 100,000 digits
to bring up your welcome page,
that's going to be a problem.
Your database can be
obviously overwhelmed.
You're hitting it way too often or
you're just pulling too much data from
it or pushing too much data into it.
That can be bad.
And a great one is external services
because no external service ever
wants to admit they're wrong.
So instrumenting your app
such that when they're wrong,
you can prove it will make
your life a lot easier.
So how can we fix these problems?
Well, unfortunately,
dollars are always involved.
The basic problem is you can just kind
of throw money at it and get more CPUs,
get more memory, get more network,
get a faster database,
that kind of thing.
But that won't always work,
and that's what we're going to focus
on is when that doesn't work and
you need to throw engineering at it.
And what you're really looking to
do in that case is do less work to
generate the response or to make
more efficient use of the database,
or ideally,
don't hit the database at all.
Or optimize your external
service integration,
and that becomes especially
critical as your site grows in
size and you need to start relying
on those services more and more.
So good rules to code by.
These are somewhat obvious,
but they bear repeating because when
you get into the thick of things,
it's easy to forget.
Test-driven development.
Now this is something that's really
become popular in the recent years,
and I can't emphasize
how valuable this is.
Put the unit tests together.
Do it before you write the code.
Test the capabilities and
the requirements of the code,
and then run them every
single time you build.
And when you push to deployment,
run them there, and run many of them
in parallel if you can.
They will uncover so many
obvious problems and save
you a huge amount of time.
Another obvious one that everyone misses,
including myself, is make it work,
make it right, make it fast.
As developers,
we often like to make problems a
lot harder than they really are,
because then our egos are boosted
when we solve a hard problem.
It's like, look,
I've sorted something 20 times
faster than the next guy.
Never mind it's only 10 elements.
Don't optimize without analysis.
And I can't say this enough times.
I've walked into so many situations
where someone's got the world's most
optimized means of writing out the
HTML page that's only used once when
the user signs up the first time.
It's like, come on, you know,
go fix the problems
that are really there.
And also,
optimize in small tests and test your
results after each of those steps.
And this gets back to unit testing.
If you've got the unit tests in place,
then this makes
optimization a lot easier,
because you can go off,
you can do the optimization,
and know immediately if
you've broken things.
And, you know, the last point is just,
it's an obvious one,
but everyone does it.
If it ain't broke, don't fix it,
which as object-oriented developers,
that means if it works now,
don't generalize it,
because that's one that we commonly do.
Also, there's a lot of optimization
that you can do at design time.
If you understand your problem well,
and any optimizations you can do
before the first lines of code
are written are always good,
keeping in mind that you shouldn't
optimize things too prematurely.
So you really want to understand the
usage patterns of your applications,
know how users are going to use it,
know how it's going to be administrated.
Now, clearly, you can't be omniscient,
but you can do a lot
of upfront work there.
And of course, make your entry page fast.
I can't tell you the number of times
I walked into a client and I hit the
entry page and it did 600 SQL queries.
It's like, no, no, no, no.
Make it static.
Even if you have to have an entry
page that just comes up that's just
long enough to get them into the site,
that's fine.
But make that fast.
Your business logic in your
application should be designed
around the response generation.
It should be designed around
what the customers are going to
be doing with the application,
even if that makes the
administrative tools less convenient.
You know, the administrative tools,
they need to be powerful,
they need to be intuitive,
but if they take a little bit of time,
hey, that's okay,
because it's all about administrating the
content for the purposes of the customer.
And if your business is like
any business I've ever heard of,
it's the customer that pays the bills.
And, you know, I've seen a lot of people
that lose sight of that.
You also want to make sure you're
retaining and reusing data.
and know when it's out of date.
This will come up again,
but it's something that bears repeating.
You know,
if you go into the database to pull
out the list of states in the country,
it's more likely not going to
change in the next five minutes.
So keep it around.
That introduces some complexity in
working with enterprise objects because,
of course, you can't create relationships
between entities that are in
different editing contexts.
So you have to be a little bit careful.
And you want to manage
that cache data carefully.
Because if you end up caching
everything all the time and
just leaving it in memory,
then you're going to get back to the
part where you run out of memory,
your machine starts swapping,
and then your performance goes to hell.
So you also want to let the
database server share in the work.
Databases have been around a long time,
and they do things like
sorting stuff really fast.
They also do indexes and
all this other stuff,
and you really want to leverage
those wherever possible.
So, one of the optimizations is to
minimize your memory footprint.
If you can minimize the
footprint of the application,
then you can have more instances running.
You can balance the
load more effectively.
And this means sharing
data across sessions,
which is not something WebObjects
does naturally out of the box.
You're going to have to play some games
there to get that kind of thing to work.
It's not hard.
It is detail-oriented.
You also want to clean up thoroughly.
It annoys me to see a developer
make the statement that
because of garbage collection,
they don't have to care
about cleaning up their code.
Okay, not every object that's going
to be collected by the garbage
collector is just using memory.
It may be using scarce resources
like connections to quote servers,
or it may be keeping a
file descriptor open,
or something like that.
And you want to let the code know
that it's done and over with.
Also, any nulled out reference,
the garbage collector doesn't have
to traverse to deal with collecting.
So that's another good way to
ensure cleaning up happens quickly.
You want to also clear your
transient instance variables
when they're no longer in use.
And this is not just
an optimization issue,
this is also a debugging issue.
If you have stale state
in your object graph,
and you don't clean up when you're done,
and then you come along at some later
point in time through some code path
that you didn't really think about,
and you run across that transient data,
and now it's out of date
and you didn't know it,
you're hosed.
Speaking from experience,
traders on trading desks get
really irritated when they
start seeing the wrong prices.
Some scars.
You also want to do things like set
your right session timeout value.
Sessions will stick around and
then they'll automatically go away.
Unfortunately, on the web,
there's no quit button,
so it's hard to know when
the session should go away.
This gets back to looking
at the usage patterns.
Look at the use patterns of your app,
understand how they are,
and understand when it's safe
to make the session go away.
Instrument Instrument your applications.
We've got some wonderful tools
built in for instrumenting them,
which Max is going to
demonstrate shortly.
They do a great job of allowing you to
detect when resources are being used or
when things are getting out of control.
You want to review those results often.
Ideally, you want the instrumentation
to be something you can turn on
dynamically in production so that
if any customer calls up and goes,
you know, your app's not working right.
You can turn this stuff on and
figure out what's going on.
And unfortunately,
because we're building applications
where it's guaranteed that our
development environment is about
as different from our deployment
environment as is possible,
there's going to be a whole
series of problems that will
only come up in production,
which makes life an adventure.
So instrument and
collect and then analyze.
Also,
you want to really plan the data access,
plan when your queries, when your caches,
when your cache updating
is going to happen,
and understand the data latency issues.
Now, data latency is all about looking at
your application and understanding
when the data becomes stale,
and how often do you really
need to let app A know that
app B's state has updated.
And a great example of this is
I ran into a client and a site,
and they needed some optimization,
and their site would just grind to
a halt when it had a bunch of users.
And what was happening is they
had all this user-specific state,
a shopping cart.
And every time the shopping
cart got updated for user one,
all other 30 app instances
got notified that that user's
shopping cart was updated,
even though that user's shopping cart was
only on one session in one app instance.
You know, and there was a case.
There was a case where they used
a generic notification method,
and by simply removing that,
all of a sudden their app was stable,
even under higher loads,
and they could have more shopping carts.
That's always good.
You also want to do things
in memory wherever possible,
and to try to get zero
queries per response.
I mean,
the fewer times you go to the database,
the fewer times you go to disk,
the better off you are.
And especially when you get
into the high-throughput
sites like the music store,
you know,
any database hit is going to be ordered.
So you want to do things in memory.
And that's why you want
to do things in memory.
You want to manage your faulting and
manage your caching so that you can
explicitly update your stale data.
You generally want to avoid situations
where WebObjects is either deciding
to populate relationships on its
own or populate caches on its own,
because it will choose a very
general-purpose solution that is
probably not optimized to your caching.
actual use patterns.
And you also want to
use a shared read-only,
well, I say read-only shared,
it should just be really
called a read-only editing
context for reference data.
It's a little bit tricky because, again,
you get into the situation where you've
got to be careful about how you make
relationships to and from objects that
were fetched into that editing context.
But, you know,
that way you can have that single shared
editing context that's read-only so it
never pays the penalty of doing updates
or inserts or anything like that.
And then another one that's
really something that's more
of a modern optimization,
this is something that's
become much easier with
recent releases of WebObjects,
is to partition your functionality
across multiple applications.
And what that means
is that if you've got,
say, a site where it has an
expensive search operation,
plus shopping cart management, plus, say,
a library of information,
plus a couple of other different things,
an administrative tool,
then you partition those different
features into different applications,
and then you can control the number
of application instances individually,
and control the configuration of
those applications individually
to optimize those particular
applications for the use they need.
And that's very important.
And with direct-to-actions,
and with putting the
session ID in cookies,
and then being able to
reconnect across different apps,
you can achieve a lot of efficiency.
And what you can also do is use
optimized object models per application.
So you can go into
Enterprise Objects Modeler,
and you can bring up your object model,
and you can have your full object
model for your administrative tool.
It's got read, it's got write,
it's got everything.
But then all those entities...
And that's really important.
And with direct-to-actions,
and with putting the
session ID in cookies,
you can create a very
simple application model.
And you can create a very simple
application model that's just the fields
you need for that particular application.
This will reduce the
memory footprint size,
it'll reduce the amount of data
going to and from the database.
It just overall will make the app faster.
It can be a little tricky because,
of course, then you've got to keep
the two things in sync.
That's a pain.
But if you're faced with this problem,
it can really help a lot.
That course obviously maximizes
reuse through frameworks.
Again, got to point it out because
some people forget about that.
I've run into that a number of times.
And you also want to partition between
sessionful and sessionless and threaded
and non-threaded because threading
is always a very complex issue.
There will be certain apps
where threading is an obvious
optimization and certain other
apps where it's not so obvious.
In particular,
things like where you have multiple
writers to the same database,
you probably don't want to thread that
because bad things can happen when you
cross commits or do partial transactions.
Sessionful versus sessionless,
there may be a number of apps like
search apps are often things that
don't need to have per user state.
And so if you can get rid of the
session in a search app and then
make it such that it's only caching,
has one big cache for
all the search data,
you can make things extremely easy.
And so you can get rid of the
session in a search app and then
make it such that it's only caching,
has one big cache for
all the search data,
you can make things extremely easy.
Okay, so you've done all the right
things in development time.
You know, it's been the world's most
perfect development schedule,
and you even delivered early.
And you got the app in production,
and now it's too slow,
or it's using too much memory
and you're thrashing the disks,
or, you know,
the CPUs are just like big space heaters.
Or it's just occasionally just
crawls to its knees just really,
really slow.
So now what do you do?
Well, the first thing is don't be silly.
And this comes from years of experience.
I've been very silly myself and have seen
many developers do really silly things.
Turn on or off the obvious flags.
Woe caching enabled, yeah,
that's a good one to have on.
Woe debugging enabled is a
really good one to turn off.
It'll bring an app to its knees,
go into production,
all of a sudden 100,000 users hit it,
and it's trying to log every SQL query.
Yeah, not a good idea.
There's the built-in NSLog facility,
plus there's, of course, Log4J,
which is wonderful because they can
both be dynamically configured such
that you can hit a production server
and pay the penalty on logging on only
the areas that you know are problematic.
And that gets back to instrumenting
and making sure that you have...
dynamic instrumentation so you can
actually catch problems in production.
Put indices on your database tables.
Sounds obvious, but, you know,
that's one that people often miss.
And then they'll go into production,
their data sizes grow to a
couple orders of magnitude bigger
than they are in development,
and all of a sudden they're
left scratching their heads as
to why the heck it's so slow
just to bring up a simple page.
And this is another one that's funny.
Minimize the size of
the generated content.
We ran into a number of sites
where the initial page load,
which is a nice big beautiful page with
a couple hundred images on it and a
bunch of text and all this other stuff,
it was about 160K of HTML,
which is way too much,
of which 40K of that was comments.
And another 30K of that was because
the image URLs were all slash images
slash clients slash sites slash
codenames slash foobar.jpeg or gif.
And by simply erasing all of that and
making it slash i slash for the images,
we were able to reduce the
page from 160K down to like 50,
60, 70K.
Still too much.
And of course, again, analyze, analyze,
analyze.
One of the challenges with building
a WebObjects-based app or other
dynamic applications is that as
a user goes through the site,
unless you specifically
do the engineering work,
you're not going to get a good
record of what the heck they did.
[Transcript missing]
Now I'd like to bring Max up,
who's going to demonstrate
some of this stuff.
Thank you, Bill.
So what I did here is built two
very simple little applications.
One is a Cocoa Web Services app that
just makes a simple query to a WebObjects
app I have also running on this machine.
And it just brings back just a bunch
of SOAP objects and lists them here.
And then you can click through
them and either choose to,
and then if it's two Rs,
you can choose to update them.
And that basically
makes the SOAP callback.
So it's just a very
simple little Cocoa app.
And on the server side,
we have a very simple WebObjects app
that threw in a bit of direct web.
So you can basically
see the current users.
I mean, this is something that you
can do out of the box very,
very quickly.
So the question then becomes,
if things are slow, what do you do?
So the first thing you can
look at is the stats page,
which will kind of just look at your
overall statistics of your pages and say,
you know, what am I doing wrong?
And it also gives you a good idea of...
Whoa, stats.
Also can give you a really good
idea of just where the high
traffic sites that you're hitting
or the pages that are coming up.
So you can see that this has
had 66 pages rendered so far.
And what you can see here is that
this will give me the number that has
been served and the number and kind
of the averages and the outliers.
So obviously, given this app,
I should optimize the event.
So I'm going to go ahead and do that.
And then I'm going to go ahead and
do the display page because this
is what's getting hit the most.
But it also can give you a good idea
that you can see that the first query
is taking 1.2 seconds to come up,
and the first inspect
page relatively quickly.
And the list page, you can see that it's
rendered eight times,
but the first time it took 3.66 seconds,
whereas the average is 0.6 seconds.
So that can sometimes tell you
that you have something that's
coming up that is rather slow.
And so to then drill down and figure out
what exactly am I doing wrong with that,
you can go over to
something called the events.
So the stats basically just gives
you kind of an overall look.
And with Music Store,
we'll log into various different apps
and just kind of check out to see
what the current apps are looking like
in terms of what their averages are,
what the outliers are,
because sometimes we'll get
some very long ones that we'll
need to start looking into.
So for the events,
so this is -- it's actually already
-- but let's just go to the setup.
So this is all just stuff that's just,
you know, comes right with WebObjects.
Very, very simple stuff.
As long as you specify the password,
nothing worse than trying a
million passwords and realizing,
oh,
it's not quite in the properties file.
And those are -- it's right there.
So we're turning all of the events on,
so we're setting it to everything,
and then we're going back to our app
and we're hitting the list all users.
So that we can go right back
to this and show the event log.
Now, this has many different options,
and it can somewhat be
rather non-intuitive exactly
how these are organized.
The one that I always like is I always
just like to look at the events group
by the page and by the component.
As this can show,
that off of the main page here, that...
The main is obviously the
one that's hurting the most.
And the query page is coming up slow
as well relative to everything else.
So pretty much when you look at this,
you can say, well, geez, the main page,
that's the pig.
And so when you turn event logging on,
it pretty much just covers
all your application.
And so anything that's going on
is getting logged with events.
So then you can say, well, geez, OK,
it's not the new list page.
It must be something else.
So it just kind of gives you
an ability to drill down.
So you can see that this-- and voila,
list users.
Well, what's going on here?
Ah, objects with fetch specification.
I think I've seen one of those before.
So you can see it on list users.
On the pull, that's the action.
That's what I had bound
up to the action link.
So when you're clicking on the link,
it says list my users.
So you can see that what's
hurting here is the fetch.
Right here is the fetch spec
of pulling up the users.
So...
Later on we'll come back and
basically show some more fine
grained tools after we go through
some of the database optimization to
then try to discover what's going on.
So, if we can go back to the slides.
So, as Bill mentioned,
my name is Max Muller.
I am one of the lead engineers
in the iTunes Music Store,
and I've been on this now
since the very beginning.
So we worked very hard and came
across all the issues that Bill,
that Pitt went over and
made some of the mistakes,
even though we've all been, you know,
pretty much most of us on the
team have been doing this for,
you know,
since the WebObjects three days.
So this is kind of just more
stuff that we've stumbled across,
that we've had to optimize.
Being one of the lead engineers,
I pretty much get to eat, breathe,
and live optimizing these applications.
When we launched in Europe,
the average from when we
had launched to Europe,
we were selling on average
5.86 songs per second.
That's how many we had
since we had launched.
So if you're doing many things
per second over an average,
you know,
obviously the peak's much higher.
The trough's lower.
Small little problems can very
quickly turn into very large problems.
And that's one thing
that we really found.
You know, we had to spend a lot of time
tuning the database because
WebObjects itself is very fast.
If you've got just a pure WoW app,
it's not doing any database work,
and you've somehow made it slow,
you've really done something wrong.
Because out of the box, it's very fast.
I mean, you're able to generate
responses very quickly.
And the request response.
very quickly.
So in terms of getting
down to the database work,
a lot of the stuff that you can
have happening in kind of your
administration apps can also very
quickly affect things that are taking
place in your production applications.
So we had a content management
application that our content team
is constantly in there working
on building the new storefronts.
And we would notice that
sometimes during the day,
the store would get slow.
And it turns out that they're in there
just doing all these queries that are
bringing back very large sets of results.
And it's actually causing
the database a lot of pain.
And so the store itself is starting
to get slow because the database is
having to service all the content
requests rather than actually the
requests of people wanting to buy music,
which is not a good thing.
So putting in place fetch limits,
putting in place requiring.
Certain queries can significantly
reduce the amount of database
work that your database is doing,
which your users actually
might not be seeing.
So there's also a number of tools
from database vendors taking queries
and handing them off to your DBAs.
It can also be very handy.
One bit that's out there that
we did was when we opened a
new connection to our database,
there's actually a stored procedure
that you can call in Oracle to put
in information about the connection.
Because by default,
for all the JDBC stuff,
when it connects in,
all that the DBA is going to be able
to see is that it's a Java process.
Yeah, well,
that doesn't really help you if
you've got a whole heterogeneous
mix of back-end processing apps,
store apps, and a very large environment
of Java applications.
So you can put in information into
the connection so that if they see
some query that's running amok,
they can actually look at the
connection that's causing that query.
So we put in the application name,
the host it's on,
even when it started up.
Because sometimes we found that
we'd forget to stop an instance and
it would be off in la-la land when
we would have rolled a new version.
So we'd go back to the
software and be like,
"Wow, what's going on?
I thought we fixed this
problem." And lo and behold,
it's like, "Well,
that guy's actually been running
for a week," kind of thing.
So binary data in the database
is definitely a no-no,
especially if you accidentally check
the locking column to where EOF thinks
it needs to lock on that attribute.
And so it'll issue the where clause.
If you do,
moving down to a 2-1 relationship,
also this goes back to what
Bill was saying about having
certain models or certain attributes
only for what you're working on,
for your administration work,
and different ones for
maybe the consumers.
So maybe you have a large clob field
that people enter in a bunch of
notes about an album that shows up,
this came from this, blah, blah, blah,
blah, blah, blah.
Well, that clob,
which could get very large,
we don't want the store
app pulling that thing up.
I mean, so you can either take the
approach of creating a new model,
or at runtime,
you can just turn off that attribute.
Say, you know, really, UF,
you don't need to worry about that one.
Leave that in the database when
we're in this kind of read-only mode,
because nobody's going to be, you know,
you don't need the clob.
So we use the shared editing context
for pretty much just reference data,
kind of complete types,
in the sense that it's kind of like a,
just a type safe enum that, um,
- You know, where it says, you know,
key one is this key,
and key two is this key,
instead of kind of having a lookup,
that's pretty much what we use it for.
So when your app starts up,
all the shared editing
context information is loaded,
and then it doesn't have to be refetched.
And likewise, when you trip the
relationships to the shared,
information to the shared,
to EOs in the shared context, it's not,
it doesn't require a database trip.
So there is inter-app messaging.
If you need to synchronize
states between applications for
critical pieces of snapshots,
a lot of the times just
telling it that it's no longer,
it's no longer a valid
snapshot is good enough.
So it's not that you really wanna move
all of the snapshots over and say,
here's the new snapshot.
It's more just along the lines of saying,
hey, you know,
this snapshot for this guy,
it got updated by this one.
So the next time you need it,
you better go get it from the database.
Raw rows is a useful technique for
pulling back large content where
you don't need all the snapshots,
stuff that you're not
going to be editing.
Within the store,
we have all these popularity
caches that are getting rebuilt.
It's like, if you like this,
you like that.
Well, as the number of items
that you can buy expands,
we'll pull that stuff in with a raw
fetch actually in a separate thread.
So this thread can just kind of
sit in the background every so
often and determines the needs to
go out to the database and pull
in a new set of recommendations.
So when we're rendering
some of the pages,
it can sync it up.
So it'll basically refresh this cache.
You know, in the background,
in the background thread
using the raw fetches.
Caching and memory, it's good.
A lot of the times, if you have kind of a
read-only application,
you can look at,
instead of using one kind
of shared editing context,
that you'll then pull stuff
into and then hold on to.
And so the application will
hold the reference to this.
It's not a shared editing context,
but it's a shared editing context.
So.
Adapter debugging enabled, obviously.
That's when you just
can turn it on and say,
what SQL is going on here?
This one, it's a godsend.
Java length throwables.
Being able to generate backtraces
anywhere is very handy.
I'll show you how we can change the
logging pattern at runtime to start
throwing in backtraces anywhere we want,
which can really help.
A lot of the times,
if you're just looking at the SQL,
you'll be like, whoa, hold on,
where's that coming from?
One of the very common mistakes that
a lot of people will make is if they
fetch an object and then they're like,
oh, they pre-fetch everything,
and then on the next request,
they'll say, well,
we need to go ahead and invalidate
the editing context here so we
make sure we have fresh data.
But the problem is you've
got the object graph there,
and so you've got an object,
and you've spent the time to
pre-fetch out all the stuff.
You've got it in two or
three or four fetches,
but then you've invalidated
all the data underneath you,
and so all of a sudden,
you start to trip over
these things again,
and it's like, oh, that's actually been
turned back into a fault.
I need to go out to the database again.
And you're like, well, geez,
I pre-fetched everything,
and now I've got SQL going
out the yin-yang.
So turning on adapter
debugging can help you see it,
but being able to actually see the
backtrace of where the faults are firing.
So I'll show you in the demo a
trick that we use in the music store
quite a bit where we can turn on.
There's actually a delegate hook,
and we can throw backtraces
whenever a fault is fired.
So a lot of times we'll turn that on and
then go to render a page that has somehow
started to get slow for some reason.
And a lot of the times it isn't because
that page itself has gotten slow.
It's because something else is
triggering something that's causing
the snapshots to get old or wiped out.
So, yeah, excess faulting,
that's a hot one.
Also, another trick that you can do
with the Java length throwables.
In a constructor of a Java object,
if you have debugging turned on,
some debugging flag,
you can actually create a throwable
object in the constructor and
stash that away in an iBar.
At which point then,
at any point later on,
you can always ask the object,
what's the stack trace
where you were created?
Which can be very handy in, say,
Woe Sessions, where sometimes we'll,
you know, we have several apps that
are completely sessionless.
And all of a sudden we'll start
to see sessions popping up.
And we'll be like, well, what's going on?
And so we'll set this
value and then we can,
at a later point,
get the Woe Sessions store.
Just basically we'll say,
dump out all your sessions
and give me the back trace.
Because there's somebody
who's doing something bad.
And, you know, more often than not,
it's a Woe Active Image.
Somebody put a Woe Active Image in.
And if you don't bind it up correctly,
it'll go ahead and create a session
and create a component action for you.
Very handy, but, you know,
not what you want when somebody just
accidentally forgot to do a binding.
And then all of a sudden
you've got these pages that are
generating lots of sessions.
Because a lot of the times
they won't be referenced.
And so you'll get a lot of them created.
So you can get one request and you can
somehow get multiple sessions created.
Which just causes all sorts of, you know,
nightmares.
Fetching it from pop-ups, yes.
Yeah, yeah.
The local instance of object you
have to also be aware of is if
your fetch timestamp lag is set,
the fetch timestamp lag is saying,
you know,
how new snapshot do you care about?
So oftentimes what people do is
they'll create a new editing context,
they'll set the fetch
timestamp lag to right now.
Say, I want everything fresh.
And then they'll start doing
the local instance of object,
and of course,
then when they touch the object,
it goes to the database.
So you could have fetched all this stuff,
and then you're like, oh,
I need to do a local instance now.
Let me create a fresh editing context.
And so that usage pattern,
all of a sudden you'd be like, well,
I thought I was doing something good,
but it turns out that local instance
of object can actually cause a
lot of trips to the database.
Simplified object model, if you can.
We're at 300 or 400 entities
right now at the music store,
and it's growing more each week.
The deep inheritance,
the vertical inheritance is the only
efficient form of inheritance in EOF.
I've used it for many years now.
It works rather well.
It allows you to have a user and then
a person user and all these kind of
things mapped onto the same table,
and you can still have relationships
to the top abstract entity.
So when you trip a relationship,
you could be getting all
the different sub-entities,
but EOF handles that gracefully
for you underneath the covers.
The other form of inheritance
is across multiple hierarchy,
across multiple tables,
and that one is rather inefficient
because anytime you trip a fault,
it's going to be like,
is it in this table?
Is it in this table?
So if you do have to use
that type of inheritance,
the best way is to always trip,
to always model the relationships
down to all the sub-entities.
Bill Bumgarner So the views
of the database queries,
if you can get an efficient
one that has the bind that,
a lot of the times if you don't
need all the bind variables
coming through in a view,
it can be efficient.
The access back pointers is a
really hot ticket one because a
lot of the times you'll have a
situation where you'll have a user,
you know, from a music store example,
so you have a user that's
got many purchases.
So when somebody clicks buy, you know,
you're going to be creating
a purchase for them.
And so the tendency might be just to say,
you know, create a purchase,
add object to both sides
of the relationship,
you know, to get the user on and save it.
Well, if you recall Steve's
keynote a few while back,
you know,
the number one person in the music store,
27,115 songs at that point.
That's a whole lot of purchases.
And so what happens is when you add
object to both sides of the relationship,
if that relationship
hasn't been fulfilled,
you're going to have a lot of faulted.
You're going to trip it,
which means you're going to be
pulling in all those things.
So all of a sudden you're like, well,
geez, why is a slow,
why is my app getting
slow on random intervals?
This buy took, you know,
three minutes in production.
What the heck happened there?
You know, not only that,
but the memory footprint
went through the roof.
Well, we just pulled in 27,000 things
just because they're trying
to purchase one more thing.
So if you don't have to
trip the relationships,
whereas, you know,
if you just create the purchase,
set the user, save it to the database,
that's fine.
So the back relationships,
or you can just not model it, just,
you know, remove the modeling in
the model completely.
So, I mean, yeah,
hope this isn't too advanced.
It's just trying to cover
a bunch of stuff that,
you know, is we've found.
That's right.
That's a little known technique.
Little known database technique.
Sure.
So, you can, you know, databases are,
you know,
they're built for these kind of things.
I mean, they're, you know,
that's what you pay the big bucks
for the big tools is that they,
you know, they provide all the tools.
And, you know, if you've got a good DBA,
you can get in there,
or you can get in there
yourself and look.
There's, you know,
if you can identify your top
queries in your database,
then you can start to go back
and look to see where they're
coming from in your applications.
About once a month, you know,
our DBAs will send us a
spreadsheet and be like,
all right, here's the top 10, go for it,
kind of thing.
So, you know,
then we start hunting around, like, okay,
where's this one coming from?
And, okay, who did this kind of thing?
So, it's very useful.
Yes.
So, generated SQL is obviously one.
We basically focus on optimizing the
parts that are getting hit the most.
We don't optimize the copyright
page if the copyright page is slow.
And stored procedures, they're
They're useful for some things,
in some places where they're very useful,
but other places where you are,
if you're using a stored procedure to
update rows that you're also modeling,
you can really wind up in a state
very quickly where you've just
executed a stored procedure call,
it's updated something underneath,
and now your snapshot's out of date.
And there are techniques that you can
use to keep your snapshots up to date,
but it's, you know, it's a pain.
So if we can go back over to demo four.
So I'll just show a few bits here.
We're doing OK on time.
So coming back here,
we can see that the list
users is inefficient.
So then it's, well, what do we do?
So the first thing is
you check your logs.
OK, nothing in the logs.
I'll bring up this,
and I'll show you just a
few tricks that we use.
And all this stuff is in
Project Wonder that we contributed back.
So nothing I'm doing here is
proprietary or something like that.
So the first thing we can start
to look at is we can be like,
well, geez, let's look at our... So this
is without restarting the app,
by the way.
So I just... Let's start
looking at our database traffic.
Let's see what's going on.
for our little app.
So list users.
All right.
Whoa, a whole lot of SQL there, huh?
So we can see that we're fetching
stuff from the user table,
but then all of a sudden we've
got user infos all over here.
A whole lot of user info columns.
So you're like, what's going on here?
So has user infos.
There's six there.
Well, there's more than six queries.
Actually, there is six queries.
Sorry.
So this is...
So let's do one more thing.
SQL's not really that useful here.
So let's look at fault firing.
Let's see when we're
actually firing faults.
So all that this thing, so let's go here.
Yeehaw.
So then we can look down here,
and so here's main.
Here's my list users method.
So the set data source,
so let me just show you the code.
Very, very simple.
So I'm just creating a
database data source of users,
setting the data source on a list page,
handing it off.
That's all the code that's going on here.
And we have one in services that the
other app is using to talk to it.
It's just a -- and this
is just the plain vanilla.
- Out of the box,
WebObjects handling all the services.
So I wrote a bit of code here,
I did it myself so that I could
This is a user service,
and so I exposed the find users method.
I used the, if you saw Bob's talk on
the first part of web,
on the introduction of WebObjects about,
you know, there's this WS make stubs
command line app that you can run.
So all I did was I wrote a
find users and an update user.
Takes the user ID, the first name,
the last name, and the find user takes a
first name and last name.
And then in my application, I said, whoa,
web service register, register this guy.
And I ran the make stubs on this.
It generated for the
Cocoa side all these stubs,
the WS generated object.
And then I just wrapped it in
a little bit of user services.
So I mean,
it took all of a few hours to do.
Nothing complex here at all.
Actually, not even a few hours,
half an hour.
So going back here now, we can see--
We can see basically the backtrace,
and so that's happening
on a set data source.
This is our fetch specification.
So we can see that we're fetching users,
no qualifiers, no prefetching keys.
Then, next we're fetching user info.
So here's main, here's set data source,
here's fetch.
Whoa, what's going on here?
Awake from fetch.
So you can see I'm just
walking up the tree.
User line 33.
So I say, well,
what's going on in user line 33?
User line 33.
Oh, if first name is Max and
I've got this test user info,
then I'm fetching it 10 times.
Not so good.
So let me set this to false.
left it on in production too.
Oops.
So I can clear out the console,
go back to the web app now.
List Users.
Go back to this guy.
And lo and behold, a little bit better.
So these are just a few techniques
that you can use to kind of
- Quickly get your head around
kind of what's going on.
I'll show you one more, which is,
- So we use Log4j for pretty
much everything we do.
And one of the nice features
that it has is you can see it,
this current one right here,
I'm saying my conversion
pattern I want to use,
I'm saying a date,
- I wanna have my memory stats.
Yeah, so this is used versus free memory.
What category is logging?
The line number that it's calling at,
the priority level, which, you know,
this is all log4j stuff of, you know,
priority of, you know,
debug or fatal or I forget what X is,
M is message, and then a new line.
So when we go back and look at
when one of these gets called,
let's see.
So, sorry, I deleted all my stuff.
So we're back here.
So let's go back and look at
the first part of this line.
Yeah, we have the date.
So far this app is using 11
megabytes and it's got 22.95 free.
This is being called from the method,
from the class,
ERX Database Context Delegate, line 149.
This is a debug.
And then this is the message.
So it's printing the stack trace itself.
If I turn, trying to think,
So if I go back to this,
if I turn the fault firing off,
because that guy was going ahead and
putting its own stack trace in there.
So save this, let's go back here.
One more time back to the home page.
So list users.
So here we have the exact same,
all the same information coming in.
This is the Log4j bridge
that's just capturing NSLog
events and routing to Log4j.
And so again, we're getting messages
coming through here.
Now what happens is then, lo and behold,
in production, now, for some reason,
there's something going wrong.
You've got some random SQL coming
out from this application.
So you connect in, and you change the
pattern to this pattern.
So this gives you the WebObjects.
It'll give you the name.
It'll give you the number of sessions.
It'll give you the WOPORT it's bound on.
It'll give you the PID of the process.
Date format, give you your VM stats.
Oh, Control-Z.
Priority.
But then I also put %at at the end,
which says, you know,
go ahead and dump that backtrace.
I want to see where this is coming from.
So now, when we turn the fire hose on...
Get the firehose on.
One more time.
And lo and behold, lots and lots.
Oh, update log.
Oh, okay, I didn't.
I turned it off.
So you can see that this does
have all the information here.
So it has the name of the application.
That's the PID.
That's the port.
So far I've created 10 active sessions,
date, memory used,
all this kind of stuff,
as well as stack trace of where
that line message is coming.
So these are just a few of the
techniques that we use to hunt down
performance problems where looking
at where the faults are firing,
where the database traffic is.
And then you can also look at
the woe events if you want to
get more fine-grained and look
at where your components are
potentially causing you problems.
So let's see.
Back to slides.
Thank you.
Thank you, Max.
So as you can see.
[Transcript missing]
There's another area of optimization
is if you generate crap HTML,
it takes the browser longer to
figure out what it should do with it.
So if you generate well-structured HTML,
the browsers render faster.
And this is an interesting one because,
of course, in the early days of HTML,
it didn't matter if you closed
your paragraph tags or your
table tags or anything else.
Because the browser would figure it out,
thanks Microsoft.
And as things evolved,
it not only affects both the
HTML processing and parsing
because now the browser has
to look ahead and then go,
oh, well,
that tag over there probably means
this one over here needs to be closed.
But it also confuses things
on the WebObjects side.
WebObjects components really want
to generate a hierarchy of tags that
are nested in an insane fashion.
So looking for things
like overlap problems,
using an HTML tool like WebLint,
to check the generated content.
And you really got to check
that generated content because,
you know, WebObjects page is generated of
many components all spewing forth
HTML that then gets serialized
and is one big response.
And you need to check the content in
the context of that whole response.
Because there can be overlap
problems that are caused by component
mis-nestings and things like that.
Simplifying table structures is
another great way to reduce content
size and moving to CSS or having
a site-wide common CSS document,
CSS being cascading style sheets,
which fortunately browsers seem
to support though inconsistently,
is another great way to both
reduce the content size,
speed up the rendering time,
and make your site more flexible.
So there's also optimizing Direct2.
The Direct2 stack is incredibly powerful.
The whole notion of having rule-based
content generation and data management
and navigation management and user
management and everything else.
I don't know of any other tool
out there that compares with
WebObjects when it comes to this.
But it is also overhead,
and there's a different
approach to optimizing it.
And Max can certainly answer
any questions in this regard.
So in the context of Direct2,
the rules engine,
it has this notion of significant
keys and unbounded keys.
Significant keys are the ones
that are the focal points and
then the ones that will be cached,
etc.
The unbound keys are the ones that
will require calculation and a lot of
faulting through the rule system to
figure out the values of those things.
That's very expensive.
So you want to avoid that.
You also want to optimize the
data being accessed by property
keys to a given task or page.
So WebObjects,
the Direct2 stack has this very
strong notion that the user
is doing something somewhere.
And you can optimize all of your
data access around that notion.
It gives you a lot of hints about what
the user is doing at any given time.
There's a number of debugging hooks,
both in EO and Direct2 and
also down at the lower layers,
and a lot of which you can
find in Project Wonder.
And there's warm-up techniques
you can do to cause the rule.
So the rule caching system to warm up its
state such that subsequent evaluations of
those rules will be much more efficient.
Like one of the most common complaints
we see about Direct2 Web or Direct2
Java client is the first hit always
takes a long time because it goes
off and the rule cache is empty and
it has to go off and evaluate all
these rules to fill the rule cache.
Well, the rule cache,
most of it is actually
going to be static results.
So there's like entire huge sets
of rules that just never need to
be evaluated again because the
results are going to be static.
And the results never change.
And so you don't want your first
user to have to pay that penalty.
And when you're building
custom components,
and this is true of both
DirectTo as well as everything else,
go for stateless.
Stateless means that there's
no session-specific data.
It means the component can
be shared across the app.
It doesn't have to be archived
and unarchived and reconstituted
during request response.
It's just a lot more efficient.
Then, also, you've got to look beyond the
WebObjects application itself.
Make sure your web server is
doing its share of the work.
And that means tuning the configuration.
Like, Apache has a mod status
and one other module,
which I can't remember
the name of anyway,
that out of the box can give
you a lot of information about
what your web server is doing.
Plus, look to your web server,
especially as your site grows.
You'll want to look to your web
server to be able to farm out
content across multiple web servers,
multiple boxes, and even up to the
level of farming out to,
say, an Akamai or the other
content aggregators.
Because, of course, once you do that,
then any hit that doesn't hit your
web server is more CPU cycles for
the primary content generation.
Offloading all serving
of the content you can,
like images, files,
multimedia to other servers,
is a great thing.
One of the challenges is always
if you have a site that's secure,
as soon as you go into the HTTPS,
then that means all the
images that are on that page
have to be encrypted as well,
because web browsers don't like mixing
encrypted and unencrypted content.
This gets back to security being the
antithesis of efficiency and convenience.
So that makes for quite the adventure,
because now you're going to have
to figure out how to pay the
price of encrypting the content
that's related to that page,
including the static content.
And of course,
encrypted downloads is a really bad idea.
Nothing like encrypting, say,
45 megabyte download for one user,
because everything has to be
encrypted per individual user.
Caching proxy servers.
This is a really neat technology.
You can use something like Squid or
the caching proxy server in Apache,
and the first user that hits
your site will pay the price
of the dynamic generation,
but then that HTML page gets stuck
in a caching proxy server that's in
between the web server front line
and your WebOptics application.
Once that item is in there,
you can then put timeouts on it,
or you could have an external
interface for invalidating it,
or the easiest thing to do is to
just simply have a dynamic page,
which has the set of URLs that
lead to what will be cached,
and just change those
URLs once it's invalidated.
And that way, since it's an URL that
hasn't been cached yet,
the caching proxy server will go, "Oh,
I got to go get it.
Go get it.
Cache it.
Next user will be really fast."
[Transcript missing]
There's also tuning the adapter
timeout values and making sure
your wool worker threads settings
are all set up correctly.
Because as is the case with most things,
the generic out-of-the-box configuration
is pretty much guaranteed to
be wrong for your application.
This is also why WebObjects
doesn't do synchronization
of data between instances.
We could do a generic solution for that,
but it would be guaranteed that
it would be inefficient for
your specific business problem.
And you also want to determine
ahead of time how you're going to
monitor the system for problems.
I mean, every component in the system.
As you add more machines,
as you add more complexities,
you add firewalls and everything,
these things need to be monitored.
And you need to plan
ahead for a catastrophe.
And Max has got some
great anecdotes on that,
I'm sure.
And I'm going to turn it over to Max now
to talk about this particularly fun,
fun issue.
Yeah, so we just wanted to finish up with
the production quality deadlocks,
which any of you who have
been in high traffic sites,
it's always one of those things
that if you've got something,
if you've got a recipe in it,
it's definitely going to
get baked in production,
and you're going to
find it in production.
So just a few topics.
One is that kill minus quit, you know,
within the Java world,
that'll basically be full
stack traces to every,
for the running app,
for all the different threads
that are currently running.
One of the most common places of is,
you know,
- Is having initialization things that
are happening in your dispatch request,
'cause dispatch request
is completely threaded,
or is, will have multiple threads coming
through there at any given point.
So even if you have your app set
in kind of single threaded mode,
it's not doing concurrent requests,
your dispatch request has to be threaded.
Likewise, any of the code in there,
if it's, if you have one method there,
it's like, oh, let me go out,
fetch something from an editing context,
cache that value, and then,
and that value will then be used
for any request that comes in.
You can guarantee that when you start,
you're gonna have two threads
that are immediately gonna get in
there and start doing EOF stuff,
which is, yeah.
- Which you will run into
serious problems with.
Most of the deadlocks we have to
track down are because of EOF,
or we're not locking things correctly.
Or the multiple EOF stacks in a
single shared editing context.
That one will kill you every single time.
So you have to,
if you want to use those full-blown
EOs in multiple different EOF stacks,
you definitely have to create new
shared editing contexts for each one
of the stacks that you want to use.
If you, by default,
if you don't do anything,
just new object store coordinator,
new EO editing context, fetch an EO,
then you're gonna be dead in the water.
So the monitoring to
detect wedged instances,
that's a big one if you
are having this problem.
And also, it's very important to start
your load testing before
you start your applications.
'Cause a lot of the times,
we ran into several issues
where we didn't detect a certain
deadlock condition because we had
all of our apps up and running,
and then we're like, all right,
now turn on the load test.
Whereas if we would've
had the load testing up,
which is what you have in
production if you bounce your apps,
'cause you constantly have users
in there clicking on everything,
and then the app has some initialization
deadlock and it starts up and it's like,
ugh, and it's wedged.
And the dead time interval in
the adapters can be a killer.
'Cause if you, 'cause if that interval,
that basically says how
long should we wait for,
if we try an instance and
it doesn't respond back,
how long should we wait
until we try it again?
And so you can get this nice
ripple effect where the wave will
crash down and all your apps will
basically register themselves
as dead if they're starting up.
And so then it will basically
wedge all your web servers.
And then your web servers
will finally come back,
your apps will be like, now we're ready.
And then the web servers will go, well,
here you go.
And the wave will come sweeping
over and the apps are like,
no, no, no, no, no more, no more.
And so they'll wedge and
the dead timeouts will set.
And so you get this nice seesaw
effect where all of a sudden
things will be really fast and
things will be really slow.
Really fast and really slow.
So that's a, yeah,
so it was just one last slide.
of these things.
So, users are funny because
they pay your bills,
but they hate you.
Because as soon as your
app starts misbehaving,
how do they respond?
By clicking like spastic monkeys.
Fun.
So, you know, quick summary here.
So start thinking fast
from the beginning,
but don't overdo it.
I mean, you want an instrument,
you want to analyze, you want to track,
you want to track your
performance over time,
but invariably you want to stay calm.
And that's like a point that just, again,
stay calm.
Because when things start going wrong,
the worst thing you can
do is to start just,
you know,
throw your hands up in the air and
start rebooting things at random without
understanding the problem or getting
your analysis tools up and running.
Or gathering metrics or gathering
evidence because simply,
you know, doing the spastic monkey
routine on the reboot button
is not going to fix anything.
It's just going to make it
happen again sometime later.
There's a tremendous
wealth of tools available.
It's easy to forget exactly
how much stuff is out there,
but the industry as a whole has
been doing web-based deployments
now for more than a decade,
and web application
deployments now for a decade,
too.
So there's just a boatload of free
and commercial products out there to
do a lot of management and analysis,
some of which are better than others.
Always be aware of that
security implication.
There's a lot of really obvious
optimizations that one can
perform on a site that will
make it completely insecure.
Like the direct actions thing
is one to watch out for.
You've got these direct actions in place.
If you carry too much state in that URL,
or the URLs,
like there was one case where someone
decided to separate their shopping
cart out from their main application,
and when they put the
product in the shopping cart,
they put the price in the URL,
and they believed it.
Yeah, that wasn't good.
Having done this for so long,
all of us having done this for so long,
there's a tremendous number
of community resources.
There's Google,
there's the Apple and the Omni list,
there's again Google,
which searches a lot of those
lists and indexes everything else.
There's Project Wonder and other random
community projects that are out there,
including a wealth of various random
free Java projects that you can leverage.
And finally, again, Google.
If you get an error message
that's coming back from something,
almost always you can put that error
message into quote marks in Google,
hit return, and find 10 other people that
are experiencing the same thing,
one of which might have the answer.
So with that, for more information,
that should have just said Google.
There's sources of
documentation and sample code.
The documentation has been updated.
I was reminded of one other thing.
As far as performance
analysis is concerned,
Shark and the Chud tools
now do Java as well.
That works with WebObjects.